¡°Samuel,¡± said old Ephraim, ¡°Seek, and ye shall find.¡±
He had written these words upon the little picture of Samuel's mother, which hung in that corner of the old attic which served as the boy's bedroom; and so Samuel grew up with the knowledge that he, too, was one of the Seekers. Just what he was to seek, and just how he was to seek it, were matters of uncertainty¡ªthey were part of the search. Old Ephraim could not tell him very much about it, for the Seekers had moved away to the West before he had come to the farm; and Samuel's mother had died very young, before her husband had a chance to learn more than the rudiments of her faith. So all that Samuel knew was that the Seekers were men and women of fervor, who had broken with the churches because they would not believe what was taught¡ªholding that it was every man's duty to read the Word of God for himself and to follow where it led him.
Thus the boy learned to think of life, not as something settled, but as a place for adventure. One must seek and seek; and in the end the way of truth would be revealed to him. He could see this zeal in his mother's face, beautiful and delicate, even in the crude picture; and Samuel did not know that the picture was crude, and wove his dreams about it. Sometimes at twilight old Ephraim would talk about her, and the tears would steal down his cheeks. The one year that he had known her had sufficed to change the course of his life; and he had been a man past middle life, too, a widower with two children. He had come into the country as the foreman of a lumber camp back on the mountain.
Samuel had always thought of his father as an old man; Ephraim had been hurt by a vicious horse, and had aged rapidly after that. He had given up lumbering; it had not taken long to clear out that part of the mountains. Now the hills were swept bare, and the population had found a new way of living.
Samuel's childhood life had been grim and stern. The winter fell early upon the mountain wilderness; the lake would freeze over, and the roads block up with snow, and after that they would live upon what they had raised in the summer, with what Dan and Adam¡ªSamuel's half-brothers¡ªmight bring in from the chase. But now all this was changed and forgotten; for there was a hotel at the end of the lake, and money was free in the country. It was no longer worth while to reap the hay from the mountain meadows; it was better to move the family into the attic, and ¡°take boarders.¡± Some of the neighbors even turned their old corncribs into sleeping shacks, and advertised in the city papers, and were soon blossoming forth in white paint and new buildings, and were on the way to having ¡°hotels¡± of their own.
Old Ephraim lacked the cunning for that kind of success. He was lame and slow, tending toward stoutness, and having a film over one eye; and Samuel knew that the boarders made fun of him, even while they devoured his food and took advantage of him. This was the first bitterness of Samuel's life; for he knew that within old Ephraim's bosom was the heart of a king. Once the boy had heard him in the room beneath his attic, talking with one of the boarders, a widow with a little daughter of whom the old man was fond. ¡°I've had a feeling, ma'am,¡± he was saying, ¡°that somehow you might be in trouble. And I wanted to say that if you can't spare this money, I would rather you kept it; for I don't need it now, and you can send it to me when things are better with you.¡± That was Ephraim Prescott's way with his boarders; and so he did not grow in riches as fast as he grew in soul.
Ephraim's wife had taught him to read the Bible. He read it every night, and on Sundays also; and if what he was reading was sublime poetry, and a part of the world's best literature, the old man did not know it. He took it all as having actual relationship to such matters as trading horses and feeding boarders. And he taught Samuel to take it that way also; and as the boy grew up there took root within him a great dismay and perplexity, that these moral truths which he read in the Book seemed to count for so little in the world about him.
Besides the Bible and his mother, Ephraim taught his son one other great thing; that was America. America was Samuel's country, the land where his fathers had died. It was a land set apart from all others, for the working out of a high and wonderful destiny. It was the land of Liberty. For this whole armies of heroic men had poured out their heart's blood; and their dream was embodied in institutions which were almost as sacred as the Book itself. Samuel learned hymns which dealt with these things, and he heard great speeches about them; every Fourth of July that he could remember he had driven out to the courthouse to hear one, and he was never in the least ashamed when the tears came into his eyes.
He had seen tears even in the summer boarders' eyes; once or twice when on a quiet evening it chanced that the old man unlocked the secret chambers of his soul. For Ephraim Prescott had been through the War. He had marched with the Seventeenth Pennsylvania from Bull Run to Cold Harbor, where he had been three times wounded; and his memory was a storehouse of mighty deeds and thrilling images. Heroic figures strode through it; there were marches and weary sieges, prison and sickness and despair; there were moments of horror and of glory, visions of blood and anguish, of flame and cannon smoke; there were battle flags, torn by shot and shell, and names of precious memory, which stirred the deep places of the soul. These men had given their lives for Freedom; they had lain down to make a pathway before her¡ªthey had filled up a bloody chasm so that she might pass upon her way. And that was the heritage they handed to their children, to guard and cherish. That was what it meant to be an American; that one must hold himself in readiness to go forth as they had done, and dare and suffer whatever the fates might send.
Such were the things out of which Samuel's life was made; besides these he had only the farm, with its daily tasks, and the pageant of Nature in the wilderness¡ªof day and night, and of winter and summer upon the mountains. The books were few. There was one ragged volume which Samuel knew nearly by heart, which told the adventures of a castaway upon a desert island, and how, step by step, he solved his problem; Samuel learned from that to think of life as made by honest labor, and to find a thrill of romance in the making of useful things. And then there was the story of Christian, and of his pilgrimage; the very book for a Seeker¡ªwith visions of glory not too definite, leaving danger of premature success.
And then, much later, some one left at the place a volume of the ¡°Farm Rhymes¡± of James Whitcomb Riley; and before Samuel's eyes there opened a new vision of life. He had been happy; but now suddenly he realized it. He had loved the blue sky above him, and the deep woods and the sparkling lake; but now he had words to tell about them¡ªand the common tasks of his life were transfigured with the glory of song. So one might milk the cow with stirrings of wonder, and mow in the meadows to the rhythm of ¡°Knee-deep in June.¡±
From which you may divine that Samuel was what is called an Enthusiast. He was disposed to take rosy views of things, and to believe what he was told¡ªespecially if it was something beautiful and appealing. He was given to having ideals and to accepting theories. He would be stirred by some broad new principle; and he would set to work to apply it with fervor. But you are not to conclude from this that Samuel was a fool. On the contrary, when things went wrong he knew it; and according to his religion, he sought the reason, and he sought persistently, and with all his might. If all men would do as much, the world might soon be quite a different place.
Such was Samuel's life until he was seventeen, and then a sad experience came to the family.
It was because of the city people. They brought prosperity to the country, everyone said, but old Ephraim regretted their coming, none the less. They broke down the old standards, and put an end to the old ways of life. What was the use of grubbing up stumps in a pasture lot, when one could sell minnows for a penny apiece? So all the men became ¡°guides¡± and camp servants, and the girls became waitresses. They wore more stylish clothes and were livelier of speech; but they were also more greedy and less independent. They had learned to take tips, for instance; and more than one of the girls went away to the city to nameless and terrible destinies.
These summer boarders all had money. Young and old, it flowed from them in a continuous stream. They did not have to plow and reap¡ªthey bought what they wanted; and they spent their time at play¡ªwith sailboats and fishing tackle, bicycles and automobiles, and what not. How all this money came to be was a thing difficult to imagine; but it came from the city¡ªfrom the great Metropolis, to which one's thoughts turned with ever livelier interest.
Then, one August, came a man who opened the gates of knowledge a little. Manning was his name¡ªPercival Manning, junior partner in the firm of Manning & Isaacson, Bankers and Brokers¡ªwith an address which had caused the Prescott family to start and stare with awe. It was Wall Street!
Mr. Percival Manning was round and stout, and wore striped shirts, and trousers which were like a knife blade in front; also, he fairly radiated prosperity. His talk was all of financial wizardry by which fortunes were made overnight. The firm of Manning & Isaacson was one of the oldest and most prosperous in the street, so he said; and its junior partner was in the confidence of some of the greatest powers in the financial affairs of the country. And, alas! for the Prescott family, which did not read the magazines and had never even heard of a ¡°bucket-shop¡±!
Adam, the oldest brother, took Mr. Manning back to Indian Pond on a fishing trip; and Samuel went along to help with the carries. And all the way the talk was of the wonders of city life. Samuel learned that his home was a God-forsaken place in winter¡ªsomething which had never been hinted at in any theological book which he had read. Manning wondered that Adam didn't get out to some place where a man had a chance. Then he threw away a half-smoked cigar and talked about the theaters and the music halls; and after that he came back to the inexhaustible topic of Wall Street.
He had had interesting news from the office that day; there was a big deal about to be consummated¡ªthe Glass Bottle Trust was ready for launching. For nearly a year old Harry Lockman¡ª¡°You've heard of him, no doubt¡ªhe built up the great glass works at Lockmanville?¡± said Manning. No, Adam confessed that he had never heard of Lockman, that shrewd and crafty old multi-millionaire who had gone on a still hunt for glass-bottle factories, and now had the country in the grip of the fourteen-million-dollar ¡°Glass Bottle Securities Company.¡± No one knew it, as yet; but soon the enterprise would be under full sail¡ª¡°And won't the old cormorant take in the shekels, though!¡± chuckled Manning.
¡°That might be a good sort of thing for a man to invest in,¡± said Adam cautiously.
¡°Well, I just guess!¡± laughed the other. ¡°If he's quick about it.¡±
¡°Do you suppose you could find out how to get some of that stock?¡± was the next question.
¡°Sure,¡± said Manning¡ª¡°that's what we're in business for.¡±
And then, as luck would have it, a city man bought the old Wyckman farm, and the trustees of the estate came to visit Ephraim in solemn state and paid down three crisp one-thousand-dollar bills and carried off the canceled mortgage. And the old man sat a-tremble holding in his hands the savings of his whole lifetime, and facing the eager onslaught of his two eldest sons.
¡°But, Adam!¡± he protested. ¡°It's gambling!¡±
¡°It's nothing of the kind,¡± cried the other. ¡°It's no more gambling than if I was to buy a horse because I knowed that horses would be scarce next spring. It's just business.¡±
¡°But those factories make beer bottles and whisky bottles!¡± exclaimed the old man. ¡°Does it seem right to you to get our money that way?¡±
¡°They make all kinds of bottles,¡± said Adam; ¡°how can they help what they're used for?¡±
¡°And besides,¡± put in Dan, with a master-stroke of diplomacy, ¡°it will raise the prices on 'em, and make 'em harder to git.¡±
¡°There's been fortunes lost in Wall Street,¡± said the father. ¡°How can we tell?¡±
¡°We've got a chance to get in on the inside,¡± said Adam. ¡°Such chances don't happen twice in a lifetime.¡±
¡°Just read this here circular!¡± added Dan. ¡°If we let a chance like this go we'll deserve to break our backs hoeing corn the rest of our days.¡±
That was the argument. Old Ephraim had never thought of a broken back in connection with the hoeing of corn. There were four acres in the field, and every spring he had plowed and harrowed it and planted it and replanted what the crows had pulled up; and all summer long he had hoed and tended it, and in the fall he had cut it, stalk by stalk, and stacked it; and then through October, sitting on the bare bleak hillside, he had husked it, ear by ear, and gathered it in baskets¡ªif the season was good, perhaps a hundred dollars' worth of grain. That was the way one worked to create a hundred dollars' worth of Value; and Manning had paid as much for the fancy-mounted shotgun which stood in the corner of his room! And here was the great fourteen-million-dollar Glass Bottle Trust, with properties said to be worth twenty-five million, and the control of one of the great industries of the country¡ªand stock which might easily go to a hundred and fifty in a single week!
¡°Boys,¡± said the old man, sadly, ¡°it won't be me that will spend this money. And I don't want to stand in your way. If you're bent on doing it¡ª¡±
¡°We are!¡± cried Adam.
¡°What do you say, Samuel?¡± asked the father.
¡°I don't know what to say,¡± said Samuel. ¡°It seems to me that three thousand dollars is a lot of money. And I don't see why we need any more.¡±
¡°Do you want to stand in the way?¡± demanded Adam.
¡°No, I don't want to stand in the way,¡± said Samuel.
And so the decision was made. When they came to give the order they found themselves confronted with a strange proposition; they did not have to buy the whole stock, it seemed¡ªthey might buy only the increase in its value. And the effect of this marvelous device would be that they would make ten times as much as they had expected to make! So, needless to say, they bought that way.
And they took a daily paper and watched breathlessly, while ¡°Glass Bottle Securities¡± crept up from sixty-three and an eighth to sixty-four and a quarter. And then, late one evening, old Hiram Johns, the storekeeper, drove up with a telegram from Manning and Isaacson, telling them that they must put up more ¡°margin¡±¡ª¡°Glass Bottle Securities¡± was at fifty-six and five eighths. They sat up all night debating what this could mean and trying to lay the specters of horror. The next day Adam set out to go to the city and see about it; but he met the mail on the way and came home again with a letter from the brokers, regretfully informing them that it had been necessary to sell the stock, which was now below fifty. In the news columns of the paper they found the explanation of the calamity¡ªold Henry Lockman had dropped dead of apoplexy at the climax of his career, and the bears had played havoc with ¡°Glass Bottle Securities.¡±
Their three thousand dollars was gone. It took them three days to realize it¡ªit was so utterly beyond belief, that they had to write to the brokers and receive another letter in which it was stated in black and white and beyond all misunderstanding that there was not a dollar of their money left. Adam raged and swore like a madman, and Dan vowed savagely that he would go down to the city and kill Manning. As for the father, he wrote a letter of agonized reproach, to which Mr. Manning replied with patient courtesy, explaining that he had had nothing to do with the matter; that he was a broker and had bought as ordered, and that he had been powerless to foresee the death of Lockman. ¡°You will remember,¡± he said, ¡°that I warned you of the uncertainties of the market, and of the chances that you took.¡± Ephraim did not remember anything of the sort, but he realized that there was nothing to be gained by saying so.
Samuel did not care much about the loss of his share of the money; but he did care about the grief of his father, which was terrible to see. The blow really killed him; he looked ten years older after that week and he failed all through the winter. And then late in the spring he caught a cold, and took to his bed; and it turned to pneumonia, and almost before anyone had had time to realize it, he was gone.
He went to join Samuel's mother. He had whispered this as he clutched the boy's hand; and Samuel knew that it was true, and that therefore there was no occasion for grief. So he was ashamed for the awful waves of loneliness and terror which swept over him; and he gulped back his feelings and forced himself to wear a cheerful demeanor¡ªmuch too cheerful for the taste of Adam and Dan, who were more concerned with what their neighbors would think than they were with the subtleties of Samuel's faith.
The boy had been doing a great deal of thinking that winter; and after the funeral he called a council of the family.
¡°Brothers,¡± he said, ¡°this farm is too small for three men. Dan wants to marry already; and we can't live here always. It's just as Manning said¡ª¡±
¡°I don't want to hear what that skunk said!¡± growled Adam.
¡°Well, he was right that time. People stay on the land and they divide it up and get poorer and poorer. So I've made up my mind to break away. I'm going to the city and get a start.¡±
¡°What can you do in the city?¡± asked Dan.
¡°I don't know,¡± said Samuel. ¡°I'll do my best. I don't expect to go to Wall Street and make my fortune.¡±
¡°You needn't be smart!¡± growled Dan.
But the other was quite innocent of sarcasm. ¡°What I mean is that I'll have to work,¡± said he. ¡°I'm young and strong, and I'm not afraid to try. I'll find somebody to give me a chance; and then I'll work hard and learn and I'll get promoted. I've read of boys that have done that.¡±
¡°It's not a bad idea,¡± commented Adam.
¡°Go ahead,¡± said Dan.
¡°The only thing is,¡± began Samuel, hesitatingly, ¡°I shall have to have a little money for a start.¡±
¡°Humph!¡± said Adam. ¡°Money's a scarce thing here.¡±
¡°How much'll ye want?¡± asked the other.
¡°Well,¡± said the boy, ¡°I want enough to feel safe. For if I go, I promise you I shall stay till I succeed. I shan't play the baby.¡±
¡°How do you expect to raise it?¡± was the next question.
¡°I thought,¡± replied Samuel, ¡°that we might make some kind of a deal¡ªlet me sell out my share in the farm.¡±
¡°You can't sell your share,¡± said Adam, sharply. ¡°You ain't of age.¡±
¡°Maybe I'm not,¡± was the answer; ¡°but all the same you know me. And if I was to make a bargain I'd keep it. You may be sure I'll never come back and bother you.¡±
¡°Yes, I suppose not,¡± said Adam, doubtfully. ¡°But you can't tell¡ª¡±
¡°How much do you expect to git?¡± asked Dan warily.
¡°Well, I thought maybe I could get a hundred dollars,¡± said the other and then he stopped, hesitating.
Adam and Dan exchanged a quick glance.
¡°Money's mighty scarce hereabouts,¡± said Adam.
¡°Still,¡± said Dan, ¡°I don't know, I'll go to the village tomorrow and see what I can do.¡±
So Dan drove away and came back in the evening and there was another council; he produced eight new ten-dollar bills.
¡°It was the best I could do,¡± he said. ¡°I'm sorry if it ain't enough¡±¡ªand then he stopped.
¡°I'll make that do,¡± said Samuel.
And so his brother produced a long and imposing-looking document; Samuel was too polite to read it but signed at once, and so the bargain was closed. And that night Samuel packed his few belongings in a neat newspaper bundle and before sunrise the next morning he set out upon his search.
He had his bundle slung over his back and his eighty dollars pinned tightly in an inside pocket. Underneath it his heart beat fast and high; he was young and he was free¡ªthe open road stretched out before him, and perpetual adventure beckoned to him. Every pilgrimage that he had ever read of helped to make up the thrill that stirred him, as he stood on the ridge and gazed at the old farmhouse, and waved his hand, and turned and began his journey.
The horse was needed for the plowing, and so Samuel walked the six miles to the village, and from there the mail stage took him out to the solitary railroad station. He had three hours to wait here for the train, and so he decided that he would save fifteen cents by walking on to the next station. Distance was nothing to Samuel just then.
Halfway to his destination there was a fire in a little clearing by the track, and a young man sat toasting some bread on a stick.
¡°Hello!¡± he said. ¡°You're hittin' her lively.¡±
¡°Yes,¡± said Samuel. The stranger was not much older than he, but his clothing was dirty and he had a dissipated, leering face.
¡°You're new at this game, aren't you?¡± said he.
¡°What game?¡± asked Samuel.
The other laughed. ¡°Where ye goin'?¡±
¡°To New York.¡±
¡°Goin' to hoof it all the way?¡±
¡°No!¡± gasped the boy. ¡°I'm just walking to the next station.¡±
¡°Oh, I see! What's the fare?¡±
¡°Six thirty-seven, I think.¡±
¡°Humph! Got the price, hey!¡±
¡°Yes¡ªI've got the price.¡± Samuel said this without pride.
¡°Well, you won't have it long if you live at that rate,¡± commented the stranger. ¡°Why don't you beat your way?¡±
¡°How do you mean?¡± asked Samuel.
¡°Nobody but a duffer pays fare,¡± said the other. ¡°There'll be a freight along pretty soon, and she stops at the water tank just below here. Why don't you jump her?¡±
Samuel hesitated. ¡°I wouldn't like to do that,¡± he said.
¡°Come,¡± said the other, ¡°sit down.¡±
And he held out a piece of his toast, which Samuel accepted for politeness' sake. This young fellow had run away from school at the age of thirteen; and he had traveled all over the United States, following the seasons, and living off the country. He was on his way now from a winter's holiday in Mexico. And as Samuel listened to the tale of his adventures, he could not keep the thought from troubling him, how large a part of eighty dollars was six thirty-seven. And all in a single day.
¡°Come,¡± said the young fellow; and they started down the track. The freight was whistling for brakes, far up the grade. And Samuel's heart thumped with excitement.
They crouched in the bushes, not far beyond the tank. But the train did not stop for water; it only slowed down for a curve, and it thundered by at what seemed to Samuel an appalling rate of speed. ¡°Jump!¡± shouted the other, and started to run by the track. He made a leap, and caught, and was whirled on, half visible in a cloud of dust.
Samuel's nerve failed him. He waited, while car after car went by. But then he caught hold of himself. If anyone could do it, so could he. For shame.
He started to run. There came a box-car, empty, with the door open, and he leaped and clutched the edge of the door. He was whirled from his feet, his arms were nearly jerked out of him. He was half blinded by the dust, but he hung on desperately, and pulled himself up. A minute more and he lay gasping and trembling upon the floor of the car. He was on his way to the city.
After a while, Samuel began to think; and then scruples troubled him. He was riding free; but was he not really stealing? And would his father have approved of his doing it? He had begun his career by yielding to temptation! And this at the suggestion of a young fellow who boasted of drinking and thieving! Simply to start such questions was enough, with Samuel; and he made up his mind that when he reached the city the first thing he would do would be to visit the office of the railroad, and explain what he had done, and pay his fare.
Perhaps an hour later the train came to a stop, and he heard some one walking by the track. He hid in a corner, ashamed of being there. Some one stopped before the car, and the door was rolled shut. Then the footsteps went on. There came clankings and jarrings, as of cars being shifted, and then these ceased and silence fell.
Samuel waited for perhaps an hour. Then, becoming restless, he got up and tried the door. It was fast.
The boy was startled and rather dazed. He sat down to think it out. ¡°I suppose I'm locked in till we reach New York,¡± he reflected. But then, why didn't they go?
¡°Perhaps we're on a siding, waiting for the passenger train to pass,¡± was his next thought; and he realized regretfully that he would have been on that train. But then, as hour after hour passed, and they did not go on, a terrible possibility dawned upon him. He was left behind¡ªon a siding.
Two or three trains went by, and each time he waited anxiously. But they did not stop. Silence came again, and he sat in the darkness and waited and wondered and feared.
He had no means of telling the time; and doubtless an hour seemed an age in such a plight. He would get up and pace back and forth, like a caged animal; and then he would lie down by the door, straining his ears for a sound¡ªthinking that some one might pass, unnoticed through the thick wall of the car.
By and by he became hungry and he ate the scanty meal he had in his bundle. Then he became thirsty¡ªand he had no water.
The realization of this made his heart thump. It was no joking matter to be shut in, at one could not tell what lonely place, to suffer from thirst. He sprang up and began to pound and kick upon the door in a frenzy.
But he soon tired of that and crouched on the floor again listening and shivering, half with fear and half with cold. It was becoming chillier, so he judged it must be night; up here in the mountains there was still frost at night.
There came another train, a freight, he knew by the heavy pounding and the time it took to pass. He kicked on the door and shouted, but he soon realized that it was of no use to shout in that uproar.
The craving for water was becoming an obsession. He tried not to think about it, but that only made him think about it the more; he would think about not thinking about it and about not thinking about that¡ªand all the time he was growing thirstier. He wondered how long one could live without water; and as the torment grew worse he began to wonder if he was dying. He was hungry, too, and he wondered which was worse, of which one would die the sooner. He had heard that dying men remembered all their past, and so he began to remember his¡ªwith extraordinary vividness, and with bursts of strange and entirely new emotions. He remembered particularly all the evil things that he had ever done; including the theft of a ride, for which he was paying the penalty. And meantime, with another part of his mind, he was plotting and seeking. He must not die here like a rat in a hole. There must be some way.
He tried every inch of the car¡ªof the floor and ceiling and walls. But there was not a loose plank nor a crack¡ªthe car was new. And that suggested another idea¡ªthat he might suffocate before he starved. He was beginning to feel weak and dizzy.
If only he had a knife. He could have cut a hole for air and then perhaps enlarged it and broken out a board. He found a spike on the floor and began tapping round the walls for a place that sounded thin; but they all sounded thick¡ªhow thick he had no idea. He began picking splinters away at the juncture of two planks.
Meantime hunger and thirst continued to gnaw at him. At long intervals he would pause while a train roared by, or because he fancied he had heard a sound. Then he would pound and call until he was hoarse, and then go on picking at the splinters.
And so on, for an unknown number of hours, but certainly for days and nights. And Samuel was famished and wild and weak and gasping; when at last it dawned upon his senses that a passing train had begun to make less noise¡ªthat the thumping was growing slower. The train was stopping.
He leaped up and began to pound. Then he realized that he must control himself¡ªhe must save his strength until the train had stopped. But suppose it went on without delay? He began to pound again and to shout like a madman.
The train stopped and there was silence; then came sounds of cars being coupled¡ªand meantime Samuel was kicking and beating upon the wall. He was almost exhausted and in despair¡ªwhen suddenly from outside came a muffled call¡ª¡°Hello!¡±
For a moment he could not speak. Then ¡°Help! Help!¡± he shrieked.
¡°What's the matter?¡± asked the voice.
¡°I'm locked in,¡± he called. .
¡°How'd you get in?¡±
¡°They locked me in by accident. I'm nearly dead.¡±
¡°Who are you?¡±
¡°I was riding in the car.¡±
¡°A tramp, hey? Serves ye right! Better stay there!¡±
¡°No! No!¡± screamed the boy, in terror. ¡°I'm starving¡ªI've been here for days. For heaven's sake let me out¡ªI'll never do it again.¡±
¡°If I let you out,¡± said the voice, ¡°it's my business to arrest you.¡±
¡°All right,¡± cried Samuel. ¡°Anything¡ªbut don't leave me here.¡±
There was a moment's silence. ¡°Have you got any money?¡± asked the voice.
¡°Yes. Yes¡ªI've got money.¡±
¡°Don't yell so loud. How much?¡±
¡°Why¡ªwhat?¡±
¡°How much?¡±
¡°I've got eighty dollars.¡±
¡°All right. Give it to me and I'll let you out.¡±
Frantic as he was, this staggered Samuel. ¡°I can't give you all my money,¡± he cried.
¡°All right then,¡± said the other. ¡°Stay there.¡±
¡°No, no!¡± he protested. ¡°Wait! Leave me just a little.¡±
¡°I'll leave you five dollars,¡± said the voice. ¡°Speak up! Quick!¡±
¡°All right,¡± said Samuel faintly. ¡°I'll give it to you.¡±
¡°Mind! No nonsense now!¡±
¡°No. Let me out!¡±
¡°I'll bat you over the head if you try it,¡± growled the voice; and the boy stood trembling while the hasp was unfastened and the door was pushed back a little. The light of a lantern flashed in through the crack, blinding him.
¡°Now hand out the money,¡± said the stranger, standing at one side for safety.
¡°Yes,¡± said Samuel, fumbling with the pin in his waistcoat. ¡°But I can't see to count it.¡±
¡°Be quick! I'll count it!¡±
And so he shoved out the wad. Fingers seized it; and then the light vanished, and he heard the sound of footsteps running.
For a moment he did not understand. Then, ¡°Give me my five dollars!¡± he yelled, and rolled back the door and leaped out. He was just in time to see the figure with the lantern vanish among the cars up the track.
He started to run up the track and tripped over a tie and fell headlong into a ditch. When he scrambled to his feet again the long train was beginning to move, and the light of the lantern was nowhere to be seen.
Samuel's money was gone, but he was suffering too keenly from hunger and thirst to worry about it for more than a minute. Then the thought came to him¡ªhe was here in a lonely place at night, and the train was going! If he were left he might still starve.
He ran over and caught the iron ladder of one of the freight cars and drew himself up and clung there. Later on he climbed on top of the car; but the wind was too cold¡ªhe could not stand it, and had to climb down again. And then he realized that he had left the bundle of his belongings in the empty car.
Fortunately for him the train began to slow up at the end of an hour or so, and peering out Samuel saw lights ahead. Also there were lights here and there in the landscape, and he realized that he had come to a large town. The east was just beginning to turn gray, and faint shadows of buildings were visible.
Samuel got off and walked up the track very carefully, for he was stiff as well as weak. There was a light in one of the offices at the depot, and he looked in at the window and saw a man seated at a desk writing busily. He knocked at the door.
¡°Come in,¡± said a voice, and he entered.
¡°Please, may I have a drink of water?¡± he asked.
¡°Over there in the corner,¡± said the man, scarcely looking up from his papers.
There was a bucket and dipper, and Samuel drank. The taste of the water was a kind of ecstasy to him¡ªhe drank until he could drink no more.
Then he stood waiting. ¡°I beg pardon, sir,¡± he began timidly.
¡°Hey?¡± said the man.
¡°I'm nearly starved, sir. I've had nothing to eat for I don't know how long.¡±
¡°Oh!¡± exclaimed the other. ¡°So that's it. Get out!¡±
¡°You don't understand,¡± began Samuel, perplexed.
¡°Get out!¡± cried the man. ¡°That don't go in here. No beggars allowed!¡±
Beggars! The word struck Samuel like a whip-lash.
¡°I'm no beggar!¡± he cried wildly. ¡°I¡ª¡± And then he stopped. He had been going to say, ¡°I will pay for it.¡±
He went out burning with shame, and on the spot he took his resolution¡ªcome what might, he would never beg. He would not put a morsel of food into his mouth until he had earned it.
Across from the depot was a public square, and a broad street with trolley tracks. Samuel walked down the street; and then, feeling weak and seeing a dark doorway, he went in and crouched in a corner. For a while he dozed; and then it was daylight. People were passing.
He got more water at a fountain and felt better. He went down one of the poorer streets where a man was opening a shop. There was food in the window¡ªfruit and bread¡ªand the sight made him ravenous. But he asked for work and the man shook his head.
Samuel went on. Shops were opened here and there; and everywhere he asked for a job¡ªfor any little thing to do¡ªand always it was No. Now and then he caught a whiff of some one's breakfast¡ªbacon frying, and coffee or hot bread in a bake shop. But each time he gripped his hands together and set his teeth. He would not beg. He would find work.
And so on through the morning. He went into stores, big and little. Sometimes they answered politely¡ªsometimes gruffly; but no one hesitated a moment. He went past warehouses, where men were loading wagons¡ªsurely there would be work here.
He spoke to a busy foreman in his shirt sleeves.
¡°How often must I tell you no?¡± cried the man.
¡°But you never told me before,¡± protested Samuel with great earnestness.
¡°Get out!¡± said the man. ¡°There are so many of you¡ªhow the devil can I tell?¡±
There were so many! And suddenly Samuel realized that he had passed a good many poor-looking men upon the streets. And were they all hunting jobs and not finding them? Perhaps some were even begging and getting nothing by that.
He went on with a blank terror in his soul. He gazed at the people he passed on the street; some of them had kindly faces¡ªsurely they would have helped him had they known. But there was no way for him to let them know¡ªno way but to be a beggar!
He came to the suburbs and asked at the houses. But no one wanted anything done. It was noon and people were at luncheon¡ªhe caught odors as doors were opened. He went back into the city, because he could not stand it. He was feeling weaker, and he was afraid with a ghastly fear. Pretty soon he might not be able to work!
It was a new idea to Samuel, that a man might starve in the midst of civilization. He could hardly believe it, and grew half-delirious as he thought about it. What would happen at the end? Would they let him lie down and die in the street? Or was there some place where starving men went to die?
So the day passed, and he found nothing. Several people advised him to get out of town¡ªthis was no place to look for work, they said. Apparently something was the matter with the place, but they did not stop to tell him what.
This was the first large town Samuel had ever seen, and under other circumstances he would have gazed at it with wonder. He passed great buildings of brick and stone, and trolley cars, and a fire-engine house, and many other strange sights. He came to a great high fence, inclosing many acres of buildings, dingy and black with smoke; there were tall chimneys, and rows of sheds, and railroad tracks running in. He passed other factories, huge brick buildings with innumerable windows; and many blocks of working-men's houses, small and dirty frame structures, with pale-faced children in the doorways. The roads and sidewalks here were all of black cinders, and it was hot even in May.
And then he came to a steel bridge and crossed a river and the road broadened out, and he climbed a hill and found himself walking upon a macadamized avenue lined with trees, and with beautiful residences overlooking the ridge. Rich people lived here, evidently; and Samuel stared, marveling at the splendor. He came to a great estate with a stone gateway and iron railings ten feet high, and an avenue of stately elm trees; there were bright green lawns with peacocks and lyre birds strutting about, and a great colonial mansion with white pillars in the distance. ¡°Fairview,¡± read the name upon the gates.
And then again Samuel remembered his appetite. Surely amid all this luxury there would be some chance for him! He started up the path!
He had got about halfway to the house when a man who was tending the flowers caught sight of him and came toward him. ¡°What are you doing here?¡± he called, before he had come halfway.
¡°I'm looking for some work,¡± began Samuel.
¡°Do you want to get your head punched?¡± shouted the man. ¡°What do you mean by coming in here?¡±
¡°Why, what's the matter?¡± asked the boy perplexed.
¡°Get out, you loafer!¡± cried the other.
And Samuel turned and went quickly. A loafer!
So for the first time it occurred to him to look at his clothes, which were muddy from his tumble in the ditch. And no doubt his face and hands were dirty also, and his hair unkempt, and his aspect unprepossessing enough for an applicant for labor. At any rate it was clear that this was not the part of the town to seek it in; so he went back across the bridge.
Twilight had fallen and the stores were shutting up. Soon everything would be closed; and that night he felt that he would perish. And so at last desperation seized him.
He bolted into the first lighted place he saw.
It was a saloon¡ªempty, save for a man in white behind the bar.
¡°I'm no beggar!¡± shouted Samuel.
¡°Hey?¡± said the man.
¡°I say I'm no beggar! I'll come back and pay you. I'm starving. I must have something to eat.¡±
¡°Gee whiz!¡± said the man.
¡°I was never in a saloon in my life before,¡± added Samuel, as he realized the character of the place. ¡°But please¡ªplease give me something to eat.¡±
¡°Hully gee, young feller!¡± exclaimed the bar-keeper. ¡°You do it great. You ought to be an actor. Step up and feed your face.¡±
¡°What?¡± stammered Samuel, perplexed.
¡°EAT!¡± said the other, and pointed. ¡°Maybe you understand that.¡±
And Samuel turned and saw a lot of food set out upon a counter. He rushed to it and began. At the first taste a kind of madness seized him, and he ate like a wild beast, gulping things.
For several minutes he did this, while the other watched curiously. Then he remarked, ¡°Say, you'd better quit.¡±
¡°What?¡± asked Samuel, seizing more food.
¡°I say quit,¡± said the man. ¡°Just for your own good. I see your story's true, an' a little rest won't hurt you.¡±
Samuel gazed longingly at the food, desiring more handfuls. ¡°Come over here,¡± said the man. ¡°What happened to you?¡±
¡°I was locked in an empty freight car.¡±
¡°Humph! That's a new one! How long?¡±
¡°What day is this?¡±
¡°Friday.¡±
¡°I was locked in Wednesday morning. It seemed longer.¡±
¡°It's long enough,¡± commented the barkeeper.
¡°I was robbed,¡± Samuel went on. ¡°A man took all my money.¡± And then the old shame started up in him. ¡°Don't think I'm a beggar. I'll work and pay for this.¡±
¡°That's all right,¡± said the barkeeper. ¡°Be easy.¡±
¡°Haven't you anything I can do? Some wood to split?¡±
¡°We don't burn wood.¡±
¡°Or some cleaning up?¡± Samuel looked round. The place did not seem very neat to him. ¡°I'll scrub the floors for you,¡± he said.
¡°We have 'em scrubbed in the early morning,¡± replied the man.
¡°Well, let me come and do it,¡± said Samuel.
¡°Go on!¡± said the other. ¡°You'll be ready for more feed then.¡±
¡°I'll come, just the same, sir.¡±
¡°If you take my advice,¡± the bartender observed, ¡°you'll get out of this town. Lockmanville's a poor place to hunt jobs in.¡±
Samuel started. ¡°Lockmanville!¡± he gasped.
¡°Yes,¡± said the other. ¡°Don't you know where you are?¡±
¡°I didn't know,¡± said the boy. ¡°Lockmanville! The one where the big glass works are?¡±
¡°That's the one.¡±
¡°And where old Henry Lockman lived!¡±
¡°What about it?¡± asked the other.
¡°Nothing,¡± said Samuel, ¡°only my father invested all his money in Lockman's company, and lost it.¡±
¡°Gee!¡± said the bartender.
¡°Maybe if I told them,¡± said the boy, ¡°they'd give me some work here.¡±
¡°Maybe,¡± said the other¡ª¡°only the works is shut down.¡±
¡°Shut down!¡± cried Samuel; and then added, ¡°On account of his death?¡±
¡°No¡ªthey always close in summer. But this year they closed in March. Times is bad.¡±
¡°Oh,¡± said Samuel.
¡°So there's plenty of men looking for jobs in Lockmanville,¡±. the other continued, ¡°an' some of the other factories is closed, too¡ªthe cotton mill is only runnin' half time.¡±
¡°I see.¡±
¡°Old Lockman used to say there was too many glass works,¡± the barkeeper added. ¡°An' the fellers he bought out went an' built more. So there you are.¡±
There was a pause. ¡°I'm coming back in the morning,¡± said Samuel doggedly.
¡°All right,¡± said the other, with a smile¡ª¡°if you don't forget it.¡± Then a couple of customers entered. ¡°Run along now,¡± said he.
And Samuel went¡ªthe more readily because he realized that he had been all this time in a saloon, a place of mystery and wickedness to him.
He started down the street again. A fine cold rain had begun to fall. What was he to do?
He felt warm, having feasted. But there was no use in getting wet. He glanced into the doorways as he passed, and seeing a dark and empty one, crouched inside.
Lockmanville! What a curious coincidence! And there were hundreds in the town out of work. It seemed a strange and terrible thing. Could it be that they let people starve as he was starving¡ªpeople they knew? Could it be that they went on about their business and paid no attention to such a thing?
He must get out, they told him. But how? Would the railroad take him, if he explained? Or would the people on the way give him work? He had got some food at last, but only by begging. And was he expected to beg?
There came footsteps outside. A man strode into the doorway and took hold of the door and tried it. Then he turned to go out. Samuel moved his foot out of the way.
¡°Hello!¡± said the man. ¡°Who's that?¡±
¡°Only me,¡± said Samuel.
¡°Get up there,¡± commanded the other.
He got up and a hand seized him by the collar. ¡°Who are you?¡±
He was jerked into the light before he had a chance to reply. ¡°More bums!¡± growled the voice; and Samuel, terrified, saw that he was in the grasp of a policeman.
¡°Please, sir, I'm not doing any harm,¡± he began.
¡°Come,¡± said the policeman.
¡°Where to?¡± he cried.
But the other merely jerked him along. A sudden wild horror seized Samuel. ¡°You're not going to arrest me!¡± he exclaimed.
¡°Sure,¡± said the other. ¡°Why not?¡±
¡°But,¡± he exclaimed, ¡°I've not done anything. I can't help it. I¡ª¡±
He started to drag back, and the man twisted a huge hand, in his collar, choking him. ¡°Do you want to be hit?¡± he growled.
So Samuel went on. But sobs shook him, convulsive sobs of terror and despair, and tears of shame rolled down his cheeks. He was going to jail!
¡°What's the matter with you?¡± said the policeman after a bit. ¡°Why don't you be quiet?¡±
¡°You've no business to arrest me,¡± wailed the boy. ¡°I haven't done anything, and I couldn't help it. I've no place to go and no money. And it's not my fault.¡±
¡°You can tell that to the judge,¡± replied the other.
¡°But¡ªbut what have I done? Why¡ª¡±
¡°Shut up!¡± said the officer, and gave another twist at his throat. And after that Samuel was quiet.
In the station-house a fat sergeant sat dozing upon his throne. ¡°Another vagrant,¡± said the policeman, as if to say there was no special need to rouse himself.
¡°What was he doing?¡± the sergeant asked.
¡°Sleeping in a doorway,¡± was the reply.
By this time Samuel had come to realize the futility of protest. He accepted his fate with dumb despair. He gave the information the sergeant asked for¡ªSamuel Prescott, aged seventeen, native born, from Euba Corners, occupation farmer, never arrested before.
¡°All right,¡± said the man, and went back to his nap; and Samuel was led away, and after a pretense at a search was shoved into a cell and heard the iron door clang upon him.
He was alone now, and free to sob out his grief. It was the culmination of all the shame and horror that he could ever have imagined; first, to have to beg, and then to be locked up in jail. He knew now what they did with men who were out of work and starving.
He lay there weeping, and then suddenly he sat up transfixed. From the cell next to him had come a cry, a horrible blood-curdling screech, more like the scream of a wild cat than any human sound. Samuel listened, his heart pounding.
There came the voice of a man from across the corridor¡ª¡°Shut up, you hag!¡± And after that bedlam broke loose. The woman¡ªSamuel realized at last that the scream had come from a woman¡ªbroke forth into a torrent of yells and curses. Such hideous obscenities, such revolting blasphemies he had never heard in his life before¡ªhe had never dreamed that life contained within it the possibility of such depravity. It was like an explosion from some loathsome sewer; and its source was the lips of a woman.
For ten minutes or so the tirade continued until it seemed to the boy that every beautiful and sacred thing he had ever heard of in his life had been defiled forever. Then a jailer strolled down the corridor, and with a few vigorous and judicious oaths contrived to quell the uproar.
Samuel lay down again; and now he had a chance to make another discovery. He had felt sharp stinging sensations which caused him to scratch himself frantically. Then suddenly he realized that he was lying upon a mattress infested with vermin.
The discovery sent him bounding to the middle of the floor. It set him wild with rage. Such a thing had never happened to him in his life before, for his home was a decent and clean one. This was the crowning infamy¡ªthat they should have taken him, helpless as he was, and shut him up in a filthy hole to be devoured by bedbugs and lice.
In the morning they brought him bread and coffee; and after a couple of hours' more waiting he was taken to court.
It was a big bare room with whitewashed walls. There were a few scattered spectators, a couple of policemen and several men writing at tables. Seated within an inclosure were a number of prisoners, dull and listless looking. One by one they stepped up before the railing and faced the judge; there would be a few muttered words and they would move on. Everything went as a matter of routine, which had been going that way for ages. The judge, who was elderly and gray haired, looked like a prosperous business man in a masquerade costume.
Samuel's turn came and he stood before the bar. His name was read, and the charge¡ªvagrancy.
¡°Well?¡± said the judge mechanically. ¡°What have you to say for yourself?¡±
Samuel caught his breath. ¡°It's not my fault, sir,¡± he began.
¡°Your honor,¡± prompted the policeman who stood at his elbow.
¡°Your honor,¡± said Samuel, ¡°I lost all my money. And I've been trying to find work, your honor.¡±
¡°Have you any friends in town?¡±
¡°No, your honor.¡±
¡°How long have you been here?¡±
¡°Only since yesterday, your honor.¡±
¡°How did you get here?¡±
¡°I came in on a freight train, your honor.¡±
¡°I see,¡± said the judge. ¡°Well, you came to the wrong place. We're going to put an end to vagrancy in Lockmanville. Thirty days. Next case.¡±
Samuel caught his breath. ¡°Your honor,¡± he gasped.
¡°Next case,¡± repeated the judge.
The policeman started to lead Samuel away. ¡°Your honor,¡± he cried frantically. ¡°Don't send me to jail.¡± And fighting against the policeman's grip, he rushed on, ¡°It's not my fault¡ªI'm an honest boy and I tried to find work. I haven't done anything. And you'll kill me if you send me to jail. Have mercy! Have mercy!¡±
The policeman shook him roughly. But there was something so genuine in Samuel's wail that the judge said, ¡°Wait.¡±
¡°How could I help it if I was robbed?¡± the boy rushed on, taking advantage of his chance. ¡°And what could I do but ask for work? I was brought up honest, your honor. It would have killed my father if he'd thought I'd be sent to jail. He brought me up to earn my living.¡±
¡°Who was your father?¡± asked the judge.
¡°His name was Ephraim Prescott, and he was a farmer. You can ask anyone at Euba Corners what sort of a man he was. He'd fought all through the war¡ªhe was wounded four times. And if he could be here he'd tell you that I don't deserve to go to jail.¡±
There was a moment's pause. ¡°What regiment was your father in?¡± asked the magistrate.
¡°He was in the Seventeenth Pennsylvania, your honor.¡±
¡°Be careful, boy,¡± said the other sternly. ¡°Don't try to deceive me.¡±
¡°I don't want to deceive you, your honor,¡± protested Samuel.
¡°What brigade was the Seventeenth Pennsylvania in?¡±
¡°In the Third Brigade, your honor.¡±
¡°And who commanded it?¡±
¡°General Anderson¡ªthat is, until he was killed at the battle of Chancellorsville. My father was there.¡±
¡°I was there, too,¡± said the judge.
¡°My father used to tell me about it,¡± exclaimed Samuel with sudden eagerness. ¡°His brigade was in the right wing and they had a double line of trenches. And the rebels charged the line with cavalry. They charged a dozen times during the day, and there were big trees cut down by the bullets. My father said the rebels never fought harder than they did right there.¡±
¡°Yes,¡± said his honor, ¡°I know. I was one of them.¡±
Everyone within hearing laughed; and Samuel turned crimson.
¡°I beg pardon, your honor,¡± he said.
¡°That's all right,¡± said the judge. And then he added gravely, ¡°Very well, Samuel, we'll give you another chance for your father's sake. But don't let me see you here again.¡±
¡°No, your honor,¡± said Samuel. Then he added quickly. ¡°But what can I do?¡±
¡°Get out of Lockmanville,¡± said the other.
¡°But how? When I've no money. If your honor could only help me to some work.¡±
¡°No,¡± said the judge. ¡°I'm sorry, but I've found jobs for three men this week, and I don't know any more.¡±
¡°But then¡ª¡± began Samuel.
¡°I'll give you a dollar out of my own pocket,¡± the other added.
¡°Your honor,¡± cried Samuel startled, ¡°I don't want to take money!¡±
¡°You can send it back to me when you get a job,¡± said the judge, holding out a bill. ¡°Take it. Prisoner discharged. Next case.¡±
Samuel took the money and was turning away, when a man who had been sitting in a chair near the magistrate suddenly leaned forward.
¡°Judge,¡± he said, ¡°if I may interrupt¡ª¡±
¡°Why, surely, professor,¡± said the other pleasantly.
¡°I may possibly be able to find something for the boy to do.¡±
¡°Ah, that will be fine!¡±
¡°He seems to be a capable young fellow and might be worth helping.¡±
¡°The very thing, professor. Samuel, this is Professor Stewart, of Lockman College.¡±
Samuel was very glad to meet the professor. He was a trim little gentleman, with a carefully cut black beard and gold-rimmed eyeglasses.
¡°Here is my card,¡± he said; ¡°and if you'll come to see me to-morrow morning at my house, we'll see what we can do.¡±
¡°Thank you very much,¡± said the boy, and put the card in his pocket. Then, realizing suddenly that the policeman had let go of his arm, and that he was free, he turned and made his way through the gate.
¡°A diverting episode,¡± said the professor.
¡°Yes,¡± said the judge, with a smile. ¡°We have them now and then, you see.¡±
Samuel went out with a glow in his heart. At last he had got a start. He had got underneath the world's tough hide and found kindness and humanity after all. It had been a harrowing experience, but it would not happen again.
He had now one definite purpose in mind. He walked straight out of town and down the river road until he came to a sufficiently solitary place. Then he took off his clothes and sat down on the bank and performed a most elaborate toilet. For half an hour at least he scrubbed his head with sand and water, and combed his hair out with his fingers. And then he went over his clothing inch by inch. At least he would be through with one hideous reminder of his imprisonment.
After which he dressed again and went back to town and found the saloon where he had eaten.
¡°Hello!¡± said his friend Finnegan, the bar-keeper. ¡°Back again!¡±
¡°I came to explain about this morning,¡± said Samuel. ¡°I couldn't come because they put me in jail.¡±
¡°Gee!¡± said the other; but then he added, with a laugh, ¡°Well, it was a wet night.¡±
Samuel did not reply. ¡°I'll come to-morrow morning,¡± he said.
¡°You'd better get out of town, sonny,¡± advised the other.
¡°I'm all right. The judge gave me a dollar.¡±
¡°Humph! A dollar won't last forever.¡±
¡°No. But I've got the promise of a job. There was a gentleman there¡ªProfessor Stewart, from the college.¡±
¡°Hully gee!¡± said Finnegan. ¡°I know that guy. A little runt with a black beard?¡±
¡°I guess so,¡± said Samuel dubiously.
¡°I seen his pitcher in the paper,¡± said the other. ¡°He's one of them reformers¡ªalways messin' into things.¡±
¡°Maybe that's why he was at the court,¡± observed Samuel.
¡°Sure thing! He's a professor of sociology an' such things, an' he thinks he knows all about politics. But we handed him a few last election¡ªjust you bet!¡±
¡°Who's 'we'?¡± asked Samuel.
¡°The organization,¡± said Finnegan; ¡°the Democrats, o' course. Them reformers is always Republicans¡ªthe 'better element,' an' all that. That means the rich guys¡ªthat have their own little grafts to work. This perfessor was a great friend of old Henry Lockman¡ªan' the old man used to run this town with his little finger. But they had a big strike here three years ago, and too many men got hit over the head. So it'll be a long day before there's any more 'reform' in Lockmanville.¡±
¡°I see,¡± said Samuel.
¡°They make a great howl about the saloons an' all the rest,¡± added the barkeeper. ¡°But when the Republicans ran things, my boss paid his little rake-off just the same, you can bet. But you needn't tell that to the perfessor.¡±
¡°I won't,¡± said the boy.
¡°What you goin' to do now?¡± asked the other.
¡°I don't know. I guess I'll have to get something to eat first.¡±
¡°You'll find the cheapest way is to buy a glass of beer and then feed over there.¡±
¡°No,¡± said Samuel, startled. ¡°I¡ªI think I'd rather not do that.¡±
¡°Well, so long,¡± said Finriegan, with a laugh.
¡°You'll see me to-morrow morning,¡± said Samuel, as he went out.
